---
title: "Keeping Fit"
date: "2021-11-06"
---

## The causes, diagnosis and prevention of stress
In prehistoric times, **the physical changes in response to stress were an essential adaptation for meeting natural threats**. Even in the modern world, the stress response can be an asset for raising levels of performance during critical events such as sports activities, important meetings, or in situations of actual danger or crisis. If stress becomes persistent and low-level, however, **all parts of the body’s stress apparatus (the brain, heart, lungs, vessels and muscles) become chronically over- or under-activated**. This may produce physical or psychological damage over time. Acute stress can also be harmful in certain situations.

## Psychological effects of stress
Studies suggest that the inability to deal with stress is associated with the onset of depression or anxiety. In one study, two-thirds of subjects who experienced a stressful situation had nearly six times the risk of developing depression within that month. **Some evidence suggests that repeated release of stress hormones disrupts normal levels of serotonin, the nerve chemical that is critical for feelings of well-being**. Certainly, on a more obvious level, stress diminishes the quality of life by reducing feelings of pleasure and accomplishment, and relationships are often threatened.
Nevertheless, some stress may be beneficial. For examples, although some research has suggested that stress may be a risk factor for suicide (a 2003 study found a higher risk for suicide in women reporting both low and very high stress), those with moderare stress levels had lowest risk.

## Heart disease
The effects of mental stress on heart disease are controversial. **Stress can certainly influence the activity of the heart when it activates the sympathetic nervous system (the automatic part of the nervous system that affects many organs, including hearts). Such actions and others could theoretically negatively affect the heart in several different ways.**
Nevertheless, evidence is still needed to confirm any clear-cut relationship between stress and heart disease. For example, a 2002 study in Scotland found no greater risk for actual heart disease or heart events even in men who reported higher mental stress. In fact, higher stress was associated with fewer heart events, although men with high stress levels did tend to complain of chest pain and to go to hospital for it more often than those with lower stress levels.
Evidence has linked stress to heart disease in men, particularly in work situations where they lack control. **The association between stress and heart problems in women is weaker and there is some evidence that the ways women cope with stress may be more heart-protective.** In one study, for example, men were more apt than women to use alcohol or eat less healthily in response to stress than women, which might account for their higher heart risk from stress. Different stress factors may affect genders differently. In one study, work stress was associated with higher risk for heart disease in men, but marital stress - not work stress - was associated with more severe heart disease in women with existing heart problems.
## Eating problems
Stress can have varying effects on eating problems and weight. Often stress is related to weight gain and obesity. **Many people develop cravings for salt, fat and sugar to counteract tension and, thus, gain weight.** Weight gain can occur even with a healthy diet in some people exposed to stress. In a 200 study, lean women who gain weight in response to stress tended to be less able to adapt to and manage stressful conditions. The release of cortisol, a major stress hormone, appears to promote abdominal fat and may be the primary connection between stress and weight gain in such people.
**In contrast, some people suffer a loss of appetite and consequently lose weight.** In rare cases, stress may trigger hyperactivity of the thyroid gland, stimulating appetite but causing the body to burn up calories at a faster than normal rate. Chronically elevated levels of stress chemicals have been observed in patients with anorexia and bulimia. Some studies, however, have not found any strong link between stress and eating disorders.
## Pain
Chronic pain caused by arthritis and other conditions may be intensified by stress. However, according to a study on patients with rheumatoid arthritis, stress management techniques do not appear to have much effect on arthritic pain. **Some studies have clearly linked job dissatisfaction and depression to back pain, although it is still unclear if stress is a direct cause.**
Tension-type headaches are frequently associated with stress and stressful events. Some research suggests that headache sufferers may actually have some biological predisposition for translating stress into muscle contractions.
## Sleep disturbances
**The tensions of unresolved stress frequently cause insomnia, generally keeping the stressed person awake or causing awakening in the middle of the night or early in the morning.** In fact, evidence suggests the stress hormones can increase during sleep in anticipation of a specific waking time. However, there is some hope for sufferers in this area as relaxation therapy has been found to reduce stress levels and consequently improve the quality of sleep.
